Welcome to JW Broadcasting and the March program.
We are confident it will be faith strengthening to all of us.
Brother John Ekran is joining me today.
John, what can we look forward to?
Thank you.
We have many spiritual gems to share.
For example, if you live in a religiously divided household,
what will help you to take a stand for Jehovah despite pressure from others?
Also, we will visit the Bible exhibit at World Headquarters.
And here's some very interesting experiences about its future expansion.
And we have a music video about how we can seek first the kingdom in our day-to-day activities.
My comments to you today are based on 2nd Peter chapter 1 verse 19.
There it states, we have the prophetic word made more sure.
Yes, we are fortified by the prophetic word.
Actually, there is no one on earth today that is not affected by prophecy,
even if he is not aware of it.
What is a prophecy?
The Hebrew term for prophecy is not limited to predicting or foretelling something in the future.
It also includes divine commands or inspired instruction.
The Samaritan woman at the well recognized Jesus as a prophet
because he revealed not future things, but things about her past
that he could not have known except by divine power.
The source of all true prophecy is Jehovah God.
At 2nd Peter chapter 1 verse 21, it is said of prophecy
that men spoke from God as they were moved by Holy Spirit.
In addition to transmitting prophecy by Holy Spirit,
Jehovah occasionally communicated such messages by means of angels.
One outstanding prophet was Daniel.
In about 536 before our common era,
Daniel recorded a vision involving world powers,
having interaction with God's servants.
Turned with me to Daniel chapter 8 verses 21 and 22.
Daniel's vision was of animals representing governments.
Note this remarkable prophecy at Daniel chapter 8 verses 21 and 22.
The hairy male goat stands for the King of Greece
and the great horn that was between its eyes stands for the first King.
As for the horn that was broken so that force stood up instead of it,
there are four kingdoms from his nation that will stand up but not with his power.
Interestingly, the Bible specifically named Greece,
the ruler under which Greece became a world power in relation to God's people
like a great horn was the Macedonian Alexander the Great.
Alexander's rulership was short-lived.
He died young in the year 323 before our common era,
213 years after Daniel wrote his book.
Jehovah's angel had told Daniel that there would be four kingdoms from his nation
that will stand up in place of the Grecian Empire.
And chapter 11 verse 4 specifically states that the four regions would not go to his descendants.
Do the historical facts support these prophecies?
Yes, Alexander's two sons from different women, Heracles and Alexander the Fourth
both were killed before they reached adulthood.
Isn't it astounding how precisely the prophecy came true
that the rulership would not be passed on to Alexander's posterity?
But the prophecy also foretold that Alexander's empire would be divided up into four kingdoms.
Did that happen?
Yes, one source listed 72 different military leaders under Alexander the Great.
But the prophecy said only four would eventually rule in his place.
After Alexander's death, there were constant fierce battles between these military leaders
but finally just four dynasties resulted, just as the Bible prophesied.
One was that of General Cassander, son of Antipater, in Macedonia and Greece.
The second was that of General Le Simichus in Asia Minor and European Thrace.
Third was the one of General Seljukus, Nikitor, the Conqueror, who secured Babylon,
media, Syria, Persia and the provinces eastward to the Indus River.
And finally the fourth was that of General Thalumi Sotr, son of Lagus, who secured Egypt, Libya, Arabia, Palestine and Silis Syria.
These four proclaimed themselves King around 305 before our common era, 18 years after the death of Alexander.
The prophecy was so detailed, its fulfillment is fascinating proof of divine inspiration.
Does this not strengthen your faith and trust in the Bible? Here's another point.
What is the first prophecy in the Bible?
The first prophecy ever was the one uttered by Jehovah at Genesis chapter 3 verse 15.
It foretold that the offspring of his figurative wife, the heavenly part of his organization,
would crush Satan and his offspring, bringing liberation to mankind.
To identify this offspring, primarily Christ Jesus, Jehovah arranged for many prophecies pointing to him.
Revelation chapter 19 verse 10 says, the witness concerning Jesus is what inspires prophecy, or literally is the spirit of prophecy.
What does that mean?
That all inspired Messianic messages from God proclaimed by his servants, pointed to his son.
At Luke chapter 24 verse 44, Jesus himself said that all the prophecies concerning the Messiah must be fulfilled.
Let's consider some outstanding prophecies about Jesus and their fulfillment.
One was that he would be born of the tribe of Judah from the family of David, the son of Jesse.
More than 700 years before Jesus was born, Micah foretold in chapter 5 that he would be born in Bethlehem.
The prophecy speaks of Bethlehem Ephrathah.
Why is the designation Ephrathah important?
Because there existed another Bethlehem in the territory of Zebulun.
It has been identified with bead lamb about seven miles or 11 kilometers west, northwest of Nazareth.
Again, the prophecy was extremely specific, and amazingly I say a prophesied he would be born of a virgin.
What human would ever think of such a thing?
Daniel chapter 9 foretold that the Messiah would arrive 483 years after the command to rebuild Jerusalem.
This proved to be true in the year 29 of Archermen era, when Jesus was baptized.
Zachariah chapter 11 foretold that the Messiah would be betrayed for 30 pieces of silver.
Chapter 12 says that his body would be pierced.
It was foretold that the Messiah would die a sacrificial death for our sins and be buried in the tomb of a rich man.
Furthermore, prophecy proclaimed that he would be in the grave for parts of three days and then be resurrected.
What about the argument that Jesus deliberately arranged matters so that the events in his life would fit all these prophecies?
What do you think? Could Jesus have arranged to be born of the tribe of Judah in the town of David's birth, Bethlehem?
His mother Mary lived in Nazareth. Could he tell her while in the womb, please take me to Bethlehem because the Scripture says, I must be born there.
Obviously, the very start of his life on earth was beyond his control.
Furthermore, could Jesus have arranged for the priests to pay Judas the 30 pieces of silver to betray him?
Could he have arranged that his enemies bid in his face, that the Roman authorities sentenced him to be nailed to a stake?
That the soldiers cast lots for his garments? Or that while piercing his sight with a spear, they not follow the custom of breaking any of his bones?
Could the prophecies just mention have been fulfilled by mere chance?
One Bible scholar likened this process to the assembling of a statue made of individual pieces of marble.
Imagine that many men who had never communicated with one another each brought a piece of marble into a room.
If those pieces fit together to form a perfect statue, you would logically conclude that there must have been someone behind the scenes who had drawn the specifications and sent an assignment to each man.
Fitting together like the pieces of the statue, every messianic prophecy would provide a vital piece of information about the Messiah.
What then would be the likelihood of all the prophecies about the Messiah being fulfilled by coincidence in one person?
In an interview, researcher Louis Lapides said,
someone did the math and figured out that the probability of just eight prophecies being fulfilled by Jesus is one chance in 100 million billion.
To arrive at the figure mentioned by this scholar by addition rather than by multiplication, you would have to write down one million and then copy that figure a billion times.
Putting those odds in perspective, the scholars stated, if you took 100 million billion silver dollars, they would cover the state of Texas in the United States to a depth of two feet or 0.6 meters.
Texas has a land area of 266,807 square miles or 690,000 square kilometers. Imagine that huge area covered in silver dollars up to a depth of two feet.
Now, what if you put a mark on just one of those silver dollars and then had a blindfolded person wander the whole state and bend down to pick up just one coin?
What would be the chance that he choose the only coin that had been marked?
The scholar then stated that those are the same odds that anybody in history could have fulfilled just eight of the Messianic prophecies.
Yet Jesus fulfilled not just eight but many more Bible prophecies. This is overwhelming proof of divine inspiration.
In Corinthians chapter 1 verse 20 says, no matter how many the promises of God are, they have become yes by means of Jesus.
What does this mean for us? It means that Jesus was actually the promised Messiah who was sent by God. As such, he taught the truth.
If we believe him and follow him, then we too have the truth. There's no doubt about the divine origin of Bible prophecies.
But Bible prophecies deal not only with past events, some prophecies are having remarkable fulfillment right now before our eyes.
This gives us strong assurance that the few outstanding prophecies about the end of this wicked system of things and the paradise on earth to come will also be fulfilled in the near future without any possibility of failure.
As true Christians, we are engaged in a prophetic work. This is not in the sense that we initiate new prophecies, but in the sense that we proclaim prophecies already written down in the Bible.
At Pentecost 33 of our common era, when Holy Spirit was poured out on 120 disciples, both men and women, Peter quoted the prophet Joel saying, in the last days, God says, I will pour out some of my spirit on every sort of flesh and your sons and your daughters will prophesy.
What did the 120 disciples do at Pentecost? There's no indication that they foretold new events, but Acts chapter 2 verse 11 says, we hear them speaking about the magnificent things of God.
This was called prophesying. Today too, whether brothers or sisters or children, we share in a prophetic work speaking about the magnificent things of God.
We speak about what he has done, what he is doing now, and what he will do in the near future. What a privilege. Having seen many prophecies fulfilled, we have the prophetic work made more sure.
And we are telling people about the prophetic work in order to fortify their faith too. Yes, we do it to help them get to the road to everlasting life,
and to develop an intimate relationship with our great God, Jehovah. But sharing in the prophetic work also involves distributing literature around the world.
And we have recently made some adjustments that will simplify the work of some of our branches. I understand you know more about that, John.
That's right. You probably remember our visit to the Canada Shipping Department in the January program. And thanks to modern technology, shipping departments around the world have recently seen a change that has sped up their work tremendously.
Around the world, large shipping branches can receive literature requests from over 15,000 congregations a month. When you consider the number of publications and languages in which these publications are available, filling these requests could seem daunting.
So how have we adapted to meet this ever growing demand?
For decades, large conveyor systems were iconic of our shipping departments.
Literature requests moved along belts and were packaged by brothers and sisters. However, conveyors operated only as fast as a slowest worker and could not expand easily for growth in additional languages.
So in 2010, the governing body approved a new shipping arrangement called Pick to Cart. At first glance, a picking cart might seem a bit old-fashioned compared to the conveyor system. However, a closer look reveals a different story.
Once a congregation request is ready to be filled, a computer program, which was prepared by our brothers, calculates and assigns all of the publications to a specific number of cartons. It stipulates which carton size to use, where the carton should be placed on the cart, and which palette it will eventually land on.
How does this information get to the person filling the request? By means of a wireless network, information appears on a computer arm terminal worn by each worker. Additionally, address labels with barcodes are printed for each carton.
Cartons are placed on the cart according to the direction shown on the arm terminal. Then by means of barcode scanning, the setup of the cart is verified for accuracy.
The arm terminal directs our brother or sister to the correct pick location, displays the quantity needed for each item, and even indicates which box to put the item in.
The barcode on the cart is then scanned for verification or possible errors. Once all of the items are verified, packing lists are generated automatically.
Barcode scanning verifies the packing list are placed into the correct carton, and palettes are prepared for shipment to the congregations.
The Pictocart software monitors each pick from each picking location. When needed, the software automatically sends an electronic request to replenish the shells with new literature, so that the worker always has literature available to fill congregation requests.
The nine branches currently using Pictocart have already experienced many benefits. One is speed. With the use of carts, individuals can move separately at their own pace.
This has resulted in approximately 100 fewer workers in branches using Pictocart around the world.
Compared to other technologies, the installation of the Pictocart system is inexpensive and can easily be expanded to support additional publications and languages.
Previously, in many branches, each carton had to be double-checked manually before sealing. However, this step is now eliminated because of the accuracy of barcode scanning.
The Pictocart process has simplified and unified shipping operations worldwide. Most importantly, it fills a vital role in ensuring that our brothers and sisters in the congregations receive the exact literature that they request for use in their preaching work.
The publications put into these carts are reaching hearts all over the world. You can call it from cart to heart.
It's encouraging to see how Jehovah is speeding up the work. After all, the prophetic word in the Bible makes it very clear.
Isaiah 60-22 says,
The little one will become a thousand, and the small one a mighty nation. I, myself, Jehovah will speed it up in its own time.
Another great example of Jehovah guiding his servants is the construction of the Wal-Kill Bethel complex here in the United States.
Now before that location was acquired and built, the organization owned another property outside of New York City called Kingdom Farm.
That's actually where the Gilead School was held at the time. But the location was not ideal. So Brother George Couch was assigned to find a new property that later became Wal-Kill Bethel.
Brother Couch served at World Headquarters until his death in 2007.
Please enjoy listening to his account of what happened, told in a way that only our dear Brother Couch could.
Brother Nora stayed around in this early 60s sometime about looking at getting another farm closer to New York so we didn't have to travel so far.
So one cold Saturday morning, I called Brother Larson and I said, Brother Larson, you want to take a trip with me?
He said, I'll go with you. I didn't tell him where it was going. So we come up here to the Goulville place.
And I come up with the intention of asking Brother Goulville where he advised us to look for buying a farm.
And so we got here about 10 o'clock in cold. They have finished the barn work and we come in the house and had a cup of coffee and had a bite breakfast with them.
And of course they kept looking at us wondering, what in the world are you doing up here?
So finally we said, we're thinking of getting a farm closer to New York than Kingdom Farm and thought maybe it had some ideas.
And it just stunned them. They looked at one another and then they looked at us and I don't know what in the world did we say wrong?
And she said, you know, yesterday we put this farm up for sale and we were the buyers of it then.
But we had no workers and so one Tuesday morning, Brother Norm, Brother Larson and I were coming up here to the farm and we brought up the subject of where we going to get help.
Brother Norm made this suggestion on why don't you bring in some circuit and district overseers and call them in for a short time and have them help.
And so we had the file with this of the circuit district overseer. So on our way up we picked out 50 circuit and district overseers.
We wrote them a letter and told them it was a special assignment. It would only last about six months.
We didn't have a typewriter, we didn't have a computer, we didn't have blueprints when we started the job.
Brother Dexter Bushing, he bought himself a calculator to do the stress and then strain the figure and work on it and that's how we built the building.
The schedule was from daylight to dark. We set up a temporary kitchen in the farmhouse and fed cafeteria style which worked out quite well.
The brothers ate in the porch out in the yard and wherever they could sit down. We got the basement in on the farm building and the brothers put beds in there.
So it was a makeshift. We had everything but tents. And I'd say most of our pick and shovel brothers, they slept in the corn cribs, they slept in the hay mow, they slept anywhere they could put a bunk up.
All the brothers at Brooklyn Bethel with 25 years or more senior already were invited to come up and they had a nice steak meal for us.
Brother Norgate the dedication talk and then he called in brother friends to say a few words.
And brother friends get up and he started back in the garden to feed and with Adam and Eve that what he was saying the man started off as a farmer.
And he sort of developed that to a certain extent. After that I came up here every week no doubt for the next 10 to 15 years.
I saw the brothers turn this piece of ground from a junk yard to a paradise is today.
That started the society in their construction work, our own construction work. Then we built several other buildings after that we saw we could do it.
And the interesting thing is it wasn't long after that we started to send the brothers into foreign lands to help the brothers build the branch homes, missionary homes, kingdom halls.
Just to be honest with it we had to get out of New York. Our buildings weren't big enough to take the modern presses.
There were high enough the weight limit or buildings wouldn't hold them. You couldn't buy land in New York City to put up a building like you had there.
It was almost an impossibility. So there was only one thing to do our presses were old and we had to replace them.
No place in New York to put them we looked for land but we couldn't find any place. The Lord just drove us up here.
When you look back over things sometimes you think my someone had some wise thinking and a good foresight.
No the Lord Spirit didn't. The Lord's running the organization. It's a pediatric organization. Sometimes it's surprising where the idea comes from the what you're going to do.
Don't worry about what it's going to be like after Armageddon. It'll be just the way we wanted because the Lord's going to do it.
The Lord didn't see fit the put into the Bible we don't need to know now. We got our hands full now just preaching.
What the Lord has in mind for the future? Who knows?
Jehovah's direction was clear. Many brothers and sisters worked very hard on that construction project and we know that Jehovah blessed their efforts.
And there's a great need for more zealous workers in the organization today. If you're young are you trying to determine what to do with your life?
Maybe pioneer work at Bethel or maybe pursue a career? It's a big decision to make and requires many sincere prayers to Jehovah for wisdom.
But if you're in a religiously divided household it could be your facing some unique challenges when deciding your future. This young man is going through just that.
My name is Marcus. I've got a good life and a good family but lately I'm really having a tough time.
Mom was baptized a few years ago as one of Jehovah's Witnesses. She studies the Bible with me and the two of us go to meetings and out in the men's shoe together.
But I'm being pulled in other directions. My dad owns his own business and he takes care of us. He's always telling me success is security.
He seems pretty sure that sports and going to college will prepare for the real world. He's not a witness and I'm not always sure how he feels about my Bible study.
I guess we've avoided talking about it. My brother Todd and I used to hang out a lot but he doesn't have much time for me anymore especially when Amy calls.
He says if I get baptized I won't be allowed to have any fun. My cousins live two doors down. For years they'd come back after school.
But lately they've been into some stuff that I know was wrong. It's hard to say no. I was starting to get really confused. My household was divided and so was I.
My tough day was about to get worse. It was meeting it for mom and I. But dad wanted me to stay for a big party with his family.
I hate feeling like I constantly disappoint him. As it turned out Jeremy was visiting for the first time since going to Bethel.
Mom said that his family was just like ours and that his decision to serve Jehovah took courage. He wrote a scripture from 1 Peter chapter 5.
Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God so that he may exalt you in due time.
He thought about it but I guess I didn't really understand what he was saying. That weekend Jeremy asked her work with me in field service.
We talked more about how 1 Peter chapter 5 helped him decide what to do. His heart was divided but he said that humbling himself meant doing God's will and then trusting that Jehovah could make his heart catch up later.
He knew Jehovah cared for him and that there were only two choices. Jehovah's way or Satan's. Then he read verse 9 to me but take your stand against him firm in the faith and he asked me to do two things when I got home.
He said I should pray about my situation and second he said that I should try and think of a Bible character who took a stand for Jehovah.
Timothy took a stand and chose spiritual goals explaining that to his father would have taken courage.
Talking to my dad would be tough. Just another time he'd be disappointed in me. But Timothy's example and Jeremy's encouragement helped me realize exactly what I had to do.
It wasn't easy. Dad loves me but I know he doesn't fully understand my choice.
But I explained how my Bible study has already helped me. At school I've been offered drugs, approached my girls, tempted to fight but I've resisted it all.
And that made that think. I know that won't be our last conversation but it's a start. I know which way to go now.
I've chosen Jehovah's way and my heart is no longer divided and I'm convinced. Jehovah is with me.
Don't you agree that Marcus made the right decision? But did you notice how important the support of the visiting brother was to him?
The personal interest he displayed made quite a difference in Marcus' determination to take a stand for Jehovah.
Earlier today I had the opportunity to speak with one of the brothers backstage. His mother's a witness but his father has yet to embrace the truth.
But something he really appreciated while growing up was how attentive the brothers in the congregation were.
For example, he was invited to join an elder in his family when they visited a neighboring congregation to give a public talk.
And the elder explained to him what a speaker needs to keep in mind when preparing the talk, when giving the talk and so forth.
You know that was very valuable training for that young brother.
And even today, many years later, this brother remembers and appreciates the loving care he received from so many in the congregation.
Although we all have a responsibility to assist one another, the elders are charged with taking the lead in caring for the flock.
This is important in the case of divided households because we know how Jehovah feels about those who are spiritually or physically fatherless.
Psalm 68 verse 5 says that Jehovah is the father of the fatherless and a protector of widows.
Yes, Jehovah loves you very much.
But now let's join Mark Sanderson as he provides us with some exciting news about one of the exhibits in our main lobby here in Brooklyn.
The exhibit highlights how we want to preserve the prophetic word.
At the annual meeting of Jehovah's Witnesses held in October 2013, the governing body was pleased to announce the opening of a new display in Brooklyn, New York, entitled The Bible and the Divine Name.
We're happy to provide you with an update on what has happened since that time.
Our brothers have been excited about the display.
More than 133,000 have come to visit since the opening.
Many have also shown their interest by donating rare and valuable Bibles to enhance this collection.
We are pleased to share some information about some of these fascinating Bibles.
At the 2013 annual meeting, we expressed interest in obtaining a first edition copy of the King James Bible, which was printed in the year 1611.
Well, we received a surprising email shortly thereafter.
A brother wrote and told us that he had located the King James Bible we were looking for.
He explained that while visiting with an elderly couple in his congregation, he mentioned that the governing body was interested in locating this particular Bible.
Well, apparently the brother's eyes lit up and he said, I have one, but how could that be?
How could he have not just a rare Bible, but the exact one we were looking for?
We had to wonder if it really was the very rare first edition of the King James Bible.
How would you know if you had a first edition King James Bible?
In 1604, King James I of England endorsed an updated English language translation to be read in the churches.
The first edition can be identified by a number of unique printing variations.
The combination of variations that occur in a given Bible serves as the kind of fingerprint.
The variation most commonly associated with the first edition of the King James Bible is founded Ruth chapter 3 verse 15, which reads, he went into the city.
Subsequent editions have the rendering she went into the city.
So the first edition is commonly known as the he Bible.
We were excited when we saw that the donated copyright he went into the city.
When the Bible arrived, it was obvious that the binding of this 400-year-old book needed restoration, but the pages of the Bible were an excellent condition.
A brother from Belgium, who was a specialist in book conservation, was able to come and teach us how to restore this valuable Bible.
We started the process of restoration by carefully removing each page.
Then we gently cleaned the pages and made any needed repairs.
Next, we rebound the Bible using techniques that were used at the time when it was printed.
Lastly, we bound the Bible in a leather cover.
It has been fully restored so that it may be enjoyed for many years to come.
The King James Bible is one of the most significant books in the English language.
According to the British Library, the King James, or authorized version of the Bible, remains the most widely published text in the English language.
Some estimate the number of printed copies to be over one billion.
Protestant missionaries often used it as the basis for translating the Bible into other languages.
This made its influence even greater.
Down through the centuries, as the King James Bible was circulated, the name of Jehovah became known around the earth.
We have also received two very important Spanish language Bible translations, the Reina Bible and the Reina Valera Bible.
Both were produced during the height of the Spanish Inquisition.
By the close of the 15th century, the Spanish Inquisition forbade the translation and possession of the Scriptures in any vernacular or common language.
Three centuries passed before the ban was finally lifted.
During that difficult time, a few valiant translators produced new Spanish versions abroad and had them smuggled into Spain.
In the mid-1500s, living on a constant fear of arrest, Casiodoro de Reina began translating the Bible into Spanish.
This man loved God's name.
He once said the custom of a meeting God's name perpetrated by the devil arose from a superstition of modern rabbis who, although claiming to revered, in fact, buried his holy name,
making God's people forget that by which he wished to be distinguished from all other gods.
In 1569, Casiodoro de Reina's translation was finally printed.
It preserved the divine name Jehovah throughout the Hebrew Scriptures.
Then, in 1582, another brave scholar, Cipriano de Valera, carefully began to revise Reina's translation.
He was 50 years old when he started and he labored on this translation for the next 20 years.
In 1602, his work was finally published in Amsterdam.
Valera also valued the divine name and he used it throughout the Hebrew Scriptures.
Today, his translation is known as the Reina Valera Bible.
It has become one of the most widely used translations in the Spanish-speaking world.
These Bibles remind us of the intense struggle that has taken place to translate the Bible into common languages and to preserve the divine name.
Our brothers have manifested tremendous generosity by donating these Bibles and we continue to be amazed by the Bibles that we are receiving.
Consider another unique example.
In 1964, a man found a 250-year-old Latin Bible in the basement of a church.
This was a unique find.
The most common edition of the Latin Bible, translated by Jerome, was completed in the year 405.
It came to be known as the Latin Volgate. Sadly, it does not use the divine name.
However, the Bible that was found in the church basement consistently uses God's name throughout the Hebrew Scriptures.
It was the 1708 edition of the Latin translation, produced by Sebastian Schmidt.
At first, when the man discovered this Bible, he was told to burn it, but he just couldn't.
Recently, this man began studying the Bible with Jehovah's Witnesses.
When he heard about the Bible display, he donated this very interesting Latin Bible.
Later, when he came to the display and saw the Bible there, he said,
After 50 years of this Bible sitting in my house, it is thrilling to see thousands of people finally able to enjoy it.
In the early 16th century, many people had a strong desire to know more about the Bible.
By that time, the Latin Volgate had been the common Bible for more than 1,000 years, but sadly, most people could not read Latin.
Adding to the problem, many errors had crept into the Volgate as it was copied over the centuries.
Translators and scholars realized that they needed to go back to the original languages
if they were to produce accurate Bible translations that would satisfy the growing thirst for scriptural knowledge.
In 1,502, Cardinal Jimenez, the Cisneros, began work on what would become a historic Bible translation tool.
Today, it is known as the Complutensian Polyglot.
Cisneros began gathering as many ancient manuscripts as he could find in Hebrew, Greek and Latin.
Then a team of scholars started to compare the manuscripts with the idea of producing one complete master text for each of the three languages.
It took the scholars 10 years to compile this monumental work, and then the actual printing took another 4 years.
Spanish printers did not have the necessary typefans and had to prepare them before the Bible could be printed.
Finally, between 1,514 and 1,517, the 6th volume set was printed.
After some 15 years of effort, this was an overwhelming accomplishment.
It was the first time that Hebrew, Greek and Latin master text for the entire Bible were printed side by side, making them easy to compare.
Actually, this was the first time that the complete New Testament had ever been printed in Greek.
However, the Pope did not give approval to the Polyglot until years later, delaying its public release until 1522.
The Complutensian Polyglot was an important step in the refinement and preservation of the Greek and Hebrew text of God's Word.
Of the approximately 600 copies originally printed, only about 1,5th are known to have survived until today.
At about the same time that the Complutensian Polyglot was produced, another scholar, Desiderios Erasmus, was working on his Greek New Testament.
He too wanted to make available the complete printed Greek New Testament for the use of scholars and Bible translators.
He was able to publish his work in 1516.
Because the distribution of the Complutensian Polyglot was delayed, Erasmus Greek New Testament became the first complete printed edition available to scholars.
Groundbreaking translators such as Martin Luther and William Tyndale used various editions of his text to accomplish their work of translating the Greek scriptures into German and English.
We are pleased to inform you that the Complutensian Polyglot and Erasmus Greek New Testament of 1516 have both been donated to the Bible display.
Of course, those who have visited the display may have difficulty imagining that we would have enough space to include these fascinating Bibles there.
We are pleased to announce that the designated area for the Bible display at Warwick will be much larger.
Would you like to see what it will look like?
The governing body has directed that the display should feature the Bible.
The Bible itself should be the star of the display.
And in particular, the focus should be on Jehovah's name.
Therefore, the overall design of the display will communicate a feeling of deep respect and reverence for God's Word.
We will use strong architectural features to illustrate the strength and security that come from reading and applying God's Word.
The lighting and interior design will help to create a spiritually reflective environment.
The main part of the display will be permanent in nature.
It will continue to tell the story of the Bible and the divine name as in the current exhibit in Brooklyn.
There will also be an area for additional exhibits where we will display many other rare and unique Bibles.
This area will be updated periodically.
Of course, the Bibles that we have discussed are only a few of the many that have been generously donated.
We have also received items such as the Leipzig Polyglot and the Julia E. Smith Bible.
Julia E. Smith was the first woman to make a complete English translation of the Bible from the original Hebrew and Greek.
She produced a literal translation and in her work she chose to preserve the divine name.
We can't mention all of the donations in this brief update, but if you visit the Bible display when it opens in Warwick, New York,
you will be able to see many of them there.
By that time, we hope to have received even more rare and unique Bibles to add to the display.
These Bibles remind us of the many God-fearing people down through the ages who work tirelessly to preserve God's Word and to make known His holy name.
They also show that Jehovah has fulfilled His promise to preserve His Word and to magnify His name in all the earth.
We invite all of you to come and see the Bible display at our current World Headquarters in Brooklyn and later when it is greatly expanded in Warwick.
We are certain that it will deepen your appreciation for God's precious Word and for His matchless name, Jehovah.
The truths pen down in the Bible can truly change lives. That's why we treasure the Bible in its message.
After all, it is the prophetic Word about God's Kingdom that gives us hope for the future.
We can only imagine what life will be like under a perfect government.
Our team met a sister from Louisiana in the United States who spent many years as a political activist, hoping to make a difference by changing the decisions of a secular government.
But instead, the truth transformed her life.
My name's Nancy Simon. I'm a private music teacher in a small town in southwest Louisiana.
I have a very productive and a happy, satisfying life, but it wasn't always that way.
Back in the 1970s, I became involved with a group of young people who were heavily involved in protesting the government and in particular the Vietnam War.
We felt so strongly about the war that we actually blockaded a presidential candidate in his hotel so that he would come down and talk to us.
During that time period, I also became heavily involved with drug use.
As a matter of fact, I would say that it was pretty much a constant stream of drug use just about every day.
Sometimes I knew what drugs I was using and sometimes I didn't because other people would give them to me and I would accept that.
Drugs led to a lot of immorality and my sense of what was right and what was wrong was really affected.
And I just didn't care anymore. I didn't care what people thought.
I didn't care if something was a sin. I did whatever I wanted to do. And with whoever I wanted to be involved with.
One night a friend of mine asked me about my lifestyle and what kind of future could I foresee for myself living the way I was living.
And he told me that he used to study the Bible. I gave that little bit of thought and I went out and bought a Bible for myself and I started to read it.
What really hit me the hardest I think was when I prayed and realized that God heard my prayer in spite of the fact that I had so turned my back on him in the past.
But when I was ready to come back to him, he was ready to have me.
On July the 10th, 1973, this friend of mine asked me if I would marry him.
And I said yes. And he'd been studying with the witnesses. So he also asked me if I would go to the kingdom hall with him. And I said yes to that too.
After the meeting, a couple invited us to have a Bible study with them. And that night I took the book, the truth that leads to eternal life.
And I read that book from one end of it to the other end. And I knew that I had found the truth.
That very same day, I immediately started making changes in my life.
Both Harry and I knew that this had to be all or nothing. And within that same year, both of us were baptized as Jehovah's Witnesses.
41 years, Harry and I have been happily serving Jehovah together. And we're so grateful to Jehovah that he gives us the help that we need to keep our marriage happy for all these many years.
Another great blessing we have is that our two wonderful girls have been able to avoid falling into some of these pitfalls that I experienced.
And the reason why is because they were raised according to Bible standards that were taught to us by Jehovah's Witnesses.
Almost every year for the last 20 years, Harry and I have been able to travel, to remote areas to help different congregations and bringing the message of God's kingdom to people.
Along the way, we made many true lasting friendships and what a contrast this is with the people that we used to protest with.
I know that I owe all of this to my loving father in heaven, Jehovah.
And I would hope that everybody who's possibly has experienced some of the things that I've gone through in my life would give the Bible a chance to be able to help them the way that it's been able to help me.
Yes, the truth transformed Sister Simon's life. And when we as a group come together each year for our assemblies and conventions, we see another aspect of how the truth transformed our lives.
It's really the truth that unites us together. In a couple of months, conventions will be held in many parts of the world and will continue through the end of this calendar year.
With that in mind, we would now like to share some experiences from last year's conventions.
This is a report that was recently given here at Bethel by a member of the Central Europe Branch Committee.
One of the outstanding highlights of the 2014 service year in the Central Europe branch.
By the way, that's Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Lichtenstein and Luxembourg.
So one of the highlights was certainly the international convention held in July in Frankfurt.
This convention hosted about 35,000 brothers and sisters, included 3,000 delegates from all over the world, perhaps even some of you.
In total, more than 230,000 attendees enjoyed the program at various locations in the whole branch territory at the same weekend.
And almost 1,500 got peptized at that special weekend.
Local brothers as well as many delegates had wonderful experiences.
There is, for example, the Indian cap driver in Frankfurt. Yes, in Frankfurt.
He took a group of delegates from Australia and from Slovakia and his taxi and they got into a friendly conversation.
And as he recognized their batches, they had the opportunity to give a brief witness and they had the chance to explain how the convention was all about.
And how the Bible had united people of all backgrounds to come together in peace.
As they reached their destination, the taxi driver refused to accept any money of them.
He insisted not to charge them and said, this morning I took some of your people to the convention and I didn't charge them.
And I don't want to charge you.
You people are doing a holy work and for this reason I won't charge you.
At least they could give him something far more worthy than money they gave him a tract.
And Jehovah knows what effect this will have on him.
Another very encouraging but somewhat bizarre situation to place in a hotel in Frankfurt.
A couple who visited as delegates from the US, rehearsed their German field service presentation in the lobby of the hotel just before going out to preach with the local brothers.
Interestingly, they attracted the attention of the hotel manager who asked what they were doing. So they explained him what they are doing.
Surprisingly, the manager offered to serve himself as a sort of crash test dummy so that they could try their presentation on him.
The couple accepted the offer and tried their German field service presentation on the manager.
To the joy of our couple, he took time to coach them still with some fine tuning on their German grammar and pronunciation.
And as the couple thought everything was said and done, the manager asked, don't you normally offer some magazines?
And the couple said yes, and then the manager said, and why don't you offer them to me? I would love to take them.
You can imagine how surprised the couple wasn't, of course, the manager got his magazines.
As you can see, that convention had really a great impact not only on the brotherhood, but as well on the outsiders.
Besides that convention highlight, there is another very encouraging development in our branch territory.
It's the continuous increase of regular pioneers in the last years, just a few facts.
In 2004, we had about 7,400 regular pioneers, and this number increased to 11,500 until now.
Today, already 870 regular pioneers have been appointed for the 2015 service year only in Germany and 1554 in our whole branch territory.
Among them, there are many couples, and it is very encouraging to see how more and more publishers in our quite wealthy country set the kingdom on first place in their lives.
We also see a lot of growth in the foreign language territory. Currently, of the about 210,000 publishers in our branch territory, almost 50,000 work in the foreign language field.
During the 2014 service year, 1717 foreign language congregations were formed, plus 63 groups, plus 54 pre-groups.
An amazing number of 1216 got baptized at foreign language assemblies and conventions in the last service year in language fields such as Romanian, Bulgarian, Persian, Tigrinia, Turkish, Chinese, and many others.
We are convinced that these developments are another evidence that God's kingdom rules, and this motivates us all to do our very best to be fellow workers of Jehovah.
It's our prayer that we get to enjoy similar experiences during this upcoming convention season, but what is really involved in being a fellow worker for Jehovah, as Brother Fiala mentioned?
The answer is found in Matthew 633, which says, keep on then seeking first the kingdom and his righteousness.
In this beautiful music video, you will see examples of how we can seek first the kingdom. The song is called What Means The Most To Me.
But are the things that I found, the things that mean the most to me, things that will help me to be, to be the person I want to be.
With each new day, there are choices to be made. Sometimes the choice will need to be a trend. The time I have can never be replayed.
The steps I take can never be retrained. That's why I want to choose carefully, and choose what really means the most to me.
The prophetic word is being fulfilled in front of our eyes as the preaching work is speeding up more and more.
And the examples in the video highlighted some of the obstacles we may face, be it higher education, a secular career or something else.
But if we handle it with wisdom, it can enable us to continue speaking about the magnificent things of God and thus be part of fulfilling the prophetic word.
To conclude our program, we would like to take you briefly to the Mexico branch.
Yes, in connection with the International Convention in Mexico City in October last year, a display was opened in the primary building that's called Caleb's Corner.
Their children can do preaching reenactments, they can take pictures with Caleb and Sofia and watch videos from the animated series.
Many of the approximately 10,000 people that come to visit the branch each month have expressed their appreciation for this display.
Thank you brothers and sisters for joining us this month.
This is JW Broadcasting from Brooklyn, New York.